6-8 English
From BBCLearningEnglish.com
Hello this is 6-minute English from BBCLearningEnglish. I'm Neil
And I'm Georgie
As we get older, many of us notice our sense of hearing getting worse
Maybe we need to concentrate harder or ask people to speak more loudly
Has that happened to you Neil?
Not really a while ago I thought maybe my ears were getting worse
But I had a check-up and everything was fine thankfully
Oh that's great
In the UK alone hearing loss affects 18 million people
And that number is increasing
In this program we'll discover why we lose hearing with age
And as usual learn some useful new vocabulary
And you can also find a transcript of this episode on our website
BBCLearningEnglish.com
But now listen up Georgie because I have a question for you
Did you know that the three smallest bones in the human body
The hammer, the anvil and the stirrup are all located in the ear
But which one of those is the smallest?
Is it a, the hammer, b, the anvil
Or c, the stirrup bone
That one's a difficult one
I'm going to say the anvil bone
Okay well we'll find out the answer later on
To understand why our hearing gets worse with age
It's useful to know a little about how the ear works in the first place
Here's Mr. Nish Metta and ear nose and throat surgeon
At the Royal National ENT Hospital in London
Giving a beginner's class to BBC Radio 4 program inside health
Hearing is an amazing sense to special sense
And the ear is really the hearing organ
So the ear is split up into three main parts
Is the outer ear, the middle ear and the aneer
The outer ear is the bit that you see so the side of your head
We call that the pinna
Think of that as the satelite dish
It collects the sounds and it funnels them in towards the sense organ
That then gets transmitted to the middle ear
The middle ear's main job is to amplify those sounds
That's done by having an ear drum
The which catches it and then vibrates
Sympathetically to the vibration of the noise that you heard
And then that's passed on to the three smallest bones in the body
The hammer, the anvil and the stirrup
The ear is made up of outer, middle and inner parts
It's one of our sense organs
Specific parts of the body, your ears, eyes, tongue, nose and skin
Which allow you to experience the outside world
The visible part, the outer ear or pinna
Acts like a satellite dish
Collecting sounds which it funnels into the middle ear
The verb funnel means to move or direct something through a narrow space
Once in the middle ear the ear drum amplifies the sounds
Before transmitting them to tiny hairs in the inner ear
Which then sends electrical signals to the brain
It's an incredible system but unfortunately one can go wrong at any stage
Here James Gallagher, presenter of BBC Radio 4's Inside Health
Asked Snishmeter when problems tend to start
We're going to spend a lot of today inish thinking about age-related hearing loss
When does that start?
Where in terror are you hearing start from around the age of eight
Okay, so we're doing all right
We're already on a downward spiral
But we've got a lot of redundancy on the system
And the speed at which are hearing declines
Is partly based on the genetics that you're born with
And then partly based on the environment that you're exposed to
So someone who has really strong genetics to protect them from hearing
But spends their life on a pneumatic drill
May have a much faster decline than someone the other side
You can imagine that your brain is doing so much computation behind the scenes
Just to listen to someone speaking and understand the words that are saying
So whilst hearing is going the brain tends to increase its listening effort
And so often it's a very slow process for you to realise that you're struggling with hearing
Where in terror of our hearing starts as young as eight
Where in terror means the damage that comes from ordinary everyday use
When Nish says this James exclaims
We're doomed
An informal way of saying with destined to fail
From the age of eight our hearing is on a downward spiral
A situation which gets worse and worse
But don't worry just yet
Human hearing has evolved with redundancy in the system
A technical phrase meaning that there are many ways to achieve the same outcome
So that a backup system can take over if other systems fail
Here for example the brain works harder to compensate for a weaker sound signal
Reaching the inner ear
And there are other ways hearing loss can be helped as well
Including hearing aids, surgery or even just removing extra ear wax
Not a job I would like very much
After that fascinating journey into the world of hearing
I think it's time to reveal the answer to your question Neil
I asked you which is the smallest bone in the body and they are all in the ear
Is it A, the hammer, B, the anvil or C, the stirrup bone
I said the anvil didn't I?
You did but I'm afraid you obviously weren't listening in biology class
Because you are wrong it is in fact the stirrup bone
Okay, let's recap the vocabulary we've learned starting with sense organs
Specific parts of the body like your ears and eyes
Which allow you to experience the world
To funnel means to move or direct something through a narrow space
And A funnel the noun is a cone shaped tool which does this
Where and tear refers to the damage that comes from using something every day
If you say we're doomed you mean we're going to be defeated or fail
And a downward spiral is a situation which continuously gets worse and worse
And finally redundancy in the system refers to having more than one way to achieve an objective
So that a backup can take over if other methods fail
You'll be sad to hear that once again are six minutes are up
But why not head over to our website
BBCLearningEnglish.com to try the quiz and worksheet for this episode
Goodbye for now
Goodbye